The 2013 change to the order of succession was part of a modernisation of the British monarchy that began in earnest after the death of Princess Diana in a road accident in Paris. Back in the 1980s, while Diana was becoming a worldwide celebrity, the rest of the the British monarchy seemed stuck in the past, attached to old formalities and increasingly detached from the "new" more informal Britain that had emerged. Following Diana's death, it was clear that people in Britain wanted a monarchy that was much more in touch with the mood of nation. Diana had that quality, and Prime Minister Tony Blair is remembered for the name he coined after her death, "the People's Princess."

The Queen's slow and formal reaction to Diana's death contrasted sharply with the outpouring of popular emotion that engulfed Britain in the days after the tragic accident. People no longer wanted a monarchy without emotion; the "stiff upper lip" was no longer seen as a virtue, but as a problem.

This came as wake-up call to the monarchy, and particularly to the Queen, and during the final decades of her life, Queen Elizabeth was at pains to create a new image for the monarchy and for herself. The image of an austere monarch, as created in the 19th century by Queen Victoria, had had its day, in its place came a new image of the monarchy, portraying the Queen as a national grandmother to replace the People's Princess. And the change of image was a success; by the time of the Queen's Golden Jubilee in 2002, the British monarchy was as popular as ever, with opinion polls showing two thirds of the British population were in favour of the monarchy, with less than a quarter wanting Britain to become a republic.

Overall, Elizabeth II was a very popular head of state, probably the most genuinely popular head of state of any country in the world during much of her 70 year reign; it is a legacy that Charles III will find hard to follow but a challenge for which he seems to be both ready and confident of success.

That success will depend to a large extent on continuing, and even accelerating, the process of modernisation. While very few people in Britain want the United Kingdom to become the United Republic, that could change if King Charles fails to keep the monarchy aligned with the expectations of the people…. and the media.