Issues that are regularly raised, and are a perennial problem for the monarchy, are the questions of cost and lifestyle. According to official figures produced for the government, the British monarchy cost the nation £102.4 million in the 2021-2022 financial year…. a lot of money at a time when a cost of living crisis was making life harder for most of the population. On the other hand, according to analysts at Bloomberg, the Monarchy actually benefits the British economy to the tune of a billion pounds a year… about ten times more than the cost.

In spite of what opponents claim, it is by no means sure that abolishing the monarchy would mean more money for other purposes. Back in 2016, a lot of people were claiming that Brexit would be a big boost to the UK economy; in the event it has proved to be the opposite, and in 2022 the UK economy was lagging behind all other G7 nations.

King Charles knows however that he needs to be seen to be reducing the wealth of the Royal Family and the number of people who benefit from it. Bloomberg estimated in 2022 that the British monarchy owned property worth about £19 billion, and while selling some of this would make little or no difference to royal lifestyles, it would be a symbolic gesture. We can therefore expect some sales of royal property in the coming years, along with other signs that the monarchy is in touch with twenty-first century expectations.

Before becoming king, Charles was known as an environmentalist, a keen supporter of organic agriculture, and someone who was acutely aware of the social problems of British cities. The "Prince's Trust", which he personally set up in 1976, is a major British charity that works with problems of homelessness and unemployment among young people who are struggling at school and at risk of exclusion, and Charles's social and environmental credentials are personal assets that will help him to take the monarchy forwards.

Finally, Charles will need to build on the monarchy's other great assets, its permanence and its position above politics. Ask people in Britain if they want to abolish the monarchy, and just over 20% may say "yes". Ask them who they would prefer to have as Britain's head of state, and there is no agreement.

As for the future of the monarchy, only one thing is sure, and that is that King Charles's reign will be shorter than that of his mother. Will the monarchy survive beyond him? Probably yes,  but nothing can be ruled out..